# The multiple sequentially Markovian coalescent (MSMC)

This software implements MSMC, a method to infer population size and gene flow from multiple genome sequences ([Schiffels and Durbin, 2014, Nature Genetics](http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/ng.3015.html), or [Preprint](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2014/05/21/005348)).

In short, msmc can infer

* the scaled population size of a single population
* gene flow across multiple populations

as a function of time from multiple phased haplotypes. When only two haplotypes are given, MSMC is similar to [PSMC](http://github.com/lh3/psmc), and we call it PSMC' because of subtle differences in the method and the underlying model, which allows PSMC' to infer more accurately the recombination rate.

# Changes:

14 Apr 2014:

* changed the calling pipeline from Complete Genomics data. It now requires the masterVarBeta file instead of the vcfBeta file. For bam calling, things haven't changed in principle, but the script has a different API, as described below.

14 Jan 2014:

* added new pipeline to generate the input files needed for msmc

21 Oct 2013:

* there are no subprograms anymore. The program `msmc` does the job.
* The required step of inferring the local branchlength is now internalized, no extra step needed
* You can now specify the exact individual haplotypes used for inference, flag `I`
* Theta is automatically determined if you don't pass it via the command line.

# Installation

Precompiled versions for Mac and Linux (both 64 bit) can be downloaded via ftp from

    ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/pub/users/ss27/msmc/

To build MSMC yourself, the [GNU Scientific Library (GSL)](http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/) must be installed on your system.

To build the program, have a look at the two Makefiles. Adjust the path to the GSL and eventually run the `release` target. The program is written in the [D programming language](http://dlang.org). The reference compiler from Digitalmars can be downloaded [here](http://dlang.org/download.html).

# Input File Format

MSMC takes as input several files, one for each chromosome, each with a list of segregating sites, including a column to denote how many sites have been called since the last segregating site. Here is an example bit of an input file for MSMC:

    1	58432	63	TCCC
    1	58448	16	GAAA
    1	68306	15	CTTT
    1	68316	10	TCCC
    1	69552	8	GCCC
    1	69569	17	TCCC
    1	801848	9730	CCCA
    1	809876	1430	AAAG
    1	825207	1971	CCCT,CCTC
    1	833223	923	TCCC

The four (tab-separated) columns are:

1. the chromosome (can be any string)
2. the position in the chromosome
3. the number of called sites (homozygous, except the site itself which can be hom. or het.) since the last segregating site. This number *includes* the given location. This means that this number must always be greater than zero!
4. the ordered and phased alleles of the multiple haplotypes. If phasing is unknown, multiple phasings can be given, separated by a comma to indicate the different possibilities. This is the case in the line before the last in the example above. Unknown alleles can be indicated by "?", but they can also simply be left out and expressed through a reduced number of called sites in the line of the next variant.

# Generate input files
## Consensus calling
### ...from BAM
I assume that you have one bam file for each sample you want to study. You will need a reference file for this. You can now call the consensus sequence for each individual via `tools/bamCaller.py`. This program reads samtools mpileup data from stdin, so you need to use it in a pipe. Here is an example line using the latest samtools (if using samtools 0.1.19 replace the `bcftools call -c -S indels` command e.g. with `bcftools view -cgI -`):

    samtools mpileup -q 20 -Q 20 -C 50 -u -r <chr> -f <ref.fa> <bam> | bcftools call -c -S indels |
    tools/bamCaller.py <mean_cov> <out_mask.bed.gz> | gzip -c > <out.vcf.gz>

where you need to give the average sequencing depth as `<mean_cov>`. This will generate two files: `<out_mask.bed.gz>` and `<out>.vcf.gz`. You can type `tools/bamCaller.py -h` to show options.

### ...from Complete Genomics
When your data was generated by Complete Genomics, you need to have access to the masterVarBeta-file, as described in their [File Format Documentation](http://www.completegenomics.com/customer-support/documentation/100357139.html). You can then call the consensus sequence via:

    tools/cgCaller.py <chr> <sample_id> <out_mask.bed.gz> <masterVarBeta> | gzip -c > <out.vcf.gz>.

Here, the sample_id is just the sample name to be used in the generated minimal vcf file. the masterVarBeta file can be given gzipped or b2zipped, using the correct file endings .gz or .bz2, respectively. Type `tools/cgCaller.py -h` to output options. As above, the command line above will generate two files, one mask file (as specified) and a vcf file. Note that Complete Genomics normally uses chromosome labels such as "chr20" instead of just "20". This has to be given exactly as the first argument!

### Including reference panel sites
If you aim to phase your data against a reference panel, e.g. from 1000 Genomes (see section below about Phasing), you need your VCF to not only contain the variant sites of the sample, but also the genotypes at additional sites at which the panel is genotyped. Both scripts `bamCaller.py` and `cgCaller.py` as described above have an option called `--legend_file` which takes a gzipped file of a format that is used in the IMPUTE and SHAPEIT reference panels. It is a simple tabular file format with one header line which gets ignored. The only important columns for this purpose are:

1. the chromosome
2. the position
3. the reference allele
4. the alternative allele
5. the type of the variant, only sites of type `SNP` are considered here.

This file gets read by my scripts, which result in a VCF with all variant and as many of these panel sites genotyped as possible.

## Phasing
This may be the painful part of it. If you use MSMC on more than two haplotypes, that is, more than 1 individual, you need to phase each vcf you generated above. In the `tools` directory you can look at the script `run_shapeit.sh`, which phases a vcf against the 1000 Genomes reference panel using [Shapeit2](http://www.shapeit.fr). You need to specify the correct input directories to the panel correctly in the script to make it work. You can then phase with

    tools/run_shapeit.sh <VCF> <TMP_DIR> <CHR>

where `<TMP_DIR>` is a temporary directory to use. I do not support phasing very strongly, please look at the script and adjust to your needs accordingly, in particular if your data is not human, or if you have trio sequences available and would like to use those for phasing.

It is important for phasing against a reference panel to genotype your samples at the sites in the reference panel. See the option `--legend_file` in the two calling scripts above!

Note that you can also decide to run MSMC on unphased data, which has been shown to generate biases, in particular when you study population divergences via the relative gene flow analysis as described below. Please refer to the paper when it's out, or send me an email if you want to try that and find it hard to interpret results.

## Generating the input file
When having generated the vcf- and mask-files and having phased as many heterozygotes as possible, you can generate an input file via:

    tools/generate_multihetsep.py --mask <mappability_mask.bed.gz> --mask <mask_1.bed.gz> --mask <mask_2.bed.gz> <vcf_1.gz> <vcf_2.gz> ...

This example uses the vcf files of two individuals, with both of their calling masks added with `--mask` and an additional mappability mask added. The mappability mask is optional, it can be generated with Heng Li's programs as described here: [SNPable](http://lh3lh3.users.sourceforge.net/snpable.shtml). For the human reference (hs37) I provide mask files for every chromosome on the same FTP site as given above.

I have tested MSMC on up to 8 haplotypes, that is 4 diploid individuals. Also, when obtaining population size estimates, all samples should be from the same population. When studying gene flow, use an equal number of individuals from each of two populations. You can in principle use more populations and/or more individuals and/or an uneven set of individuals per population, but these cases have not been tested properly.

Note that all input files for `tools/generate_multihetsep.py` need to be gzipped, which is done automatically if you generated them with the `tools/consensus_caller.sh` as described above.

# Estimation of historical effective population sizes

To run the program, the minimal command line looks like this:

    msmc --fixedRecombination -o my_msmc_output file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt [...]

For running on only one individual (two haplotypes), you should leave out the flag `--fixedRecombination`. If no mutation rate is given, as in the line above, Watterson's estimator is used to determine theta. If you find that confusing, don't worry about it, it simply sets the exact placement of the time-intervals. The flag "--fixedRecombination" is recommended, but population size estimates are pretty robust whether or not this flag is set.
More command line options are printed when simply typing `msmc`.

The program outputs three files:
* Af file called something.log: This file contains the same logging information that is printed out while it runs.
* A file called something.loop.txt. This file contains a table with parameter estimates after each iteration step. The columns of the table are: the recombination rate (fixed in the above example), the log-likelihood, and a comma-separated list of coalescence rates.
* A file called something.final.txt. This file contains a table with the final parameter estimates.
 
The final file contains multiple columns with a header line. Here are the first rows of an example:


    time_index	left_time_boundary	right_time_boundary	lambda_00
    0	-0	2.09028e-06	1086.3
    1	2.09028e-06	4.23486e-06	3373.81
    2	4.23486e-06	6.43663e-06	3726.96
    3	6.43663e-06	8.69874e-06	3009.26
    
The first column simply gives the zero-based index of the time interval. The second and third columns give the scaled begin and end time of the interval. The fourth column gives the scaled inverse population size (scaled coalescence rate) of the interval. See below on how to convert scaled times and rates to real numbers.

# Estimation of historical gene flow

If the dataset contains samples from different subpopulations of the same species (i.e. not too diverged), MSMC can estimate gene flow as a function of time. Assuming you have four haplotypes, two of which are from population 0, and two from population 1, the command for running the inference is

    msmc --fixedRecombination --skipAmbiguous -P 0,0,1,1 -o my_msmc_output file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt [...]

Here, the flag `-P 0,0,1,1` specifies that the four alleles are sampled from two subpopulations `0` and `1`. These need to be given as numbers starting from 0. For eight haplotypes, 4 sampled from each subpopulation, this would read `-P 0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1`. MSMC has been tested only on an equal number of haplotypes in each of the two subpopulation so far, feel free to try unequal numbers. In principle, MSMC allows more than two subpopulations as well, but that hasn't been tested yet.

Note that population separation analysis is expensive in memory and time. You might want to reduce the resolution for some test runs to 30 segments (using e.g. `-p 8*1+11*2`), or even 20 segments (using e.g. `-p 20*1`).

The flag `--skipAmbiguous` is recommended for gene flow estimation. It means that sites with ambiguous phasing, as described above, are removed from the analysis.

The output file now contains several coalescence rate estimates. Here is an example bit:

    time_index	left_time_boundary	right_time_boundary	lambda_00	lambda_01	lambda_11
    0	-0	2.79218e-06	2605.47	71.9887	4206.61
    1	2.79218e-06	5.68236e-06	6451.92	1256.07	3897.26
    2	5.68236e-06	8.67766e-06	3152.31	736.499	2790.45
    3	8.67766e-06	1.1786e-05	2526.36	1075.56	2790.33

Now the three columns titled lambda_?? denote the coalescence rates within and across the subpopulations. To get relative gene flow, you can compute the relative cross-coalescence rate: 2 * lambda01 / (lambda00 + lambda11).

# Scaling to real time and population sizes

MSMC outputs times and rates scaled by the mutation rate per basepair per generation.
First, scaled times are given in units of the per-generation mutation rate. This means that in order to convert scaled times to generations, divide them by the mutation rate. In humans, we used mu=1.25e-8 per basepair per generation.To convert generations into years, multiply by the generation time, for which we used 30 years.

To get population sizes out of coalescence rates, first take the inverse of the coalescence rate, scaledPopSize = 1 / lambda00. Then divide this scaled population size by 2*mu (yes, this factor 2 is different from the time scaling, sorry), which for humans is 2.5e-8.
